Molecular Genetics

Lecture 4 (Molecular genetics 1):

There are political agendas running through evolutionary biology - who gets a lobotomy, who is educatable or not, etc.

A critique of heritability.

When traits evolve, what is it about? Necessity? Genes?

What are genes? Molecules, strings of DNA, information. 

Proteins are the most important thing in your body. They form neurotransmitters, hormones, etc.

What codes for proteins?

Genes specify proteins and amino acids.

Proteins are made of amino acids, and each protein has to be coded for by a different Dna sequence. Dna codes for amino acids with three-letter nucleotides. A long string of Dna codes for amino acids that plug together to form RNA and then readouts for proteins.

If you know the sequence of Dna, you’ll know the seq of Rna, the protein it makes, the shape of that protein, and which protein it is.

Everything about proteins depends on the protein’s shape. All sorts of affector proteins fit into other effective proteins like a "lock and key."

The shape of a protein imparts info about how it interacts with other proteins. Hormones and neurotransmitters fit into receptors, for example. 

Driven by DNA sequences. Where do different shapes come from? 20 different amino acids. What makes each different is how attracted or repelled they are with water. Prion sequences falsify this idea, but we’ll regard it as true for now.

Important proteins called enzymes. They catalyze chemical reactions that would normally be very rare events. They speed up the reaction process/frequency. They break up/stick together molecules.

These enzymes change shape when they catalyze a reaction. Channels, for example, open up or close in some circumstances. Protein structure also gives info about shape change.

Francis Crick - formalized “centralized dogma of how life and information flows is from DNA to RNA to proteins.” Has been violated in several ways, but we’ll regard it as true for now.

DNA runs everything. It decides when information flows from DNA to RNA to proteins. It actually doesn’t know this. 

70’s - viruses - they get into organisms - specks of foreign DNA - hijacks the purposes of your DNA. Some viruses made of RNA. Class of enzymes that take RNA information and translates it into DNA - retroviruses.

What if something changes in the DNA? A mutation? 

Micromutation - point mutation. One letter gets changed.

An amino acid is coded for by three-letter sequences. What if one of these letters gets changed? Sometimes no consequences. DNA comes in four bases, so 64 possible three-letter mutations, but only 20 amino acids coded for. Extras used for signaling. Redundancy in the genetic code. 

Changes in the middle letter oftentimes results in little-to-no consequences because of this redundancy.

First possible mutation is point mutation. Neutral consequence. Changes in the first or third letter is not the end of the world, but can have heavy consequences in some cases. 

Second kind of mutation is deletion - results in complete change of downstream codes due to frame-shifting. All done by one base-pair change - one protein changing shape. Changes how well the protein does its job. This is microevolutionary change.

Sometimes the change is so dramatic that the protein can’t function. Example: phenylketoneuria. Chemical called phenylalanine - high levels are damaging to brain cells and nerves. Some enzyme changes phenylalanine to a safer form. A mutation in this enzyme results in the inability to change phenylalanine into its safer form. 

Example: your daughter doesn’t reach puberty - not your daughter, your son. TFM syndrome. Genetically male - have undescended testes - produces tons of testosterone, but not receptive to it due to change in testosterone receptors.

Disease found in two different cultures: one in New Guinea, one in Dominican Republic. Problem with enzymes making testosterone instead of problems with testosterone receptors.

Because of extremely low test lvls, along comes puberty, and raised test lvls - lvls don’t go up much, but still have an effect. This individual changes sex from female to male. Caused by one point mutation that doesn’t even have much of an effect.

People in these cultures have grown used to this, and have acclimated it into their cultures.

Another ex: neurochemical signaling to do with anxiety - decreases anxiety - benzodiazepines. Synthetic versions of this (Valium). They are proteins, and have their own receptors. Changes in the benzo receptors change levels of benzos in the brain and thus lvls of anxiety.

Rats bred to be alcoholics, smarter, etc. Different lvls of anxiety (for stress research, etc.). Differing shape of benzo receptors due to point mutation. 

How does this explain patterns in evolution? Involves little changes at a time. If a mutation gives a genetic line more fertility, this will increase population or variability over time. Slow change leads to big change over time. Butterfly effect. Very useful idea because it allows you to track genetic changes in a pop over time. 

Change in gene found called FOX-P2 (has to do with lang dev) identified in family with communication problems. Versions of FOX-P2 pop up everywhere in animal kingdom (bird songs, bat squeaks) - different versions in each animal. Tiny differences (one changed letter) between rats and mice, etc. Many different versions in humans. Might be evolutionary origin of language.

Stuck human version of FOX-P2 into mice, and their vocalizations were different. Wider variety of types of subsonic vocalization. 

There are 60 ways to code for 20 amino acids, meaning there are basically three different versions of every amino acid. If a spread of mutations only affects a third of the population, this is no worse than chance mutations. If you look at how a gene differs, and 99% of the cases result in different amino acids, this echoes strong selection based on this change - the changes are very consequential. If you find a long string of genes and changes in them are 99% inconsequential, you don’t want to mess with this gene - strong selection. 

You share an average of 50% of your dna with your full sibling, yet you share 94% of your genes with chimps. Genes specify traits (petals, antlers, fins, etc.). Two different species, each with active genes for dorsal fins, will both have dorsal fins. We do have similar pelvis shape with chimps, but apple trees don’t have this gene. The 94% similarity means we share 94% of our gene-coded traits with chimps, just with different versions of some amino acids.  

It’s not “do you and your sibling have the genes for opposable thumbs”, but “do you and your sibling have the same type of genes for opposable thumbs.” The 94% similarity has to do with the types of genes, not the presence or absence of the genes themselves.

80’s - Steven J Gould, Niles Eldridge - very different model - gradualism is nonsense. No gradual changes. Long periods of stasis - most mutations are inconsequential, and when they are consequential, dramatic, quick change ensues. Punctuated equilibrium.

Gould was a paleontologist, not a biologist. He traced fossil records of changes over time. Little genetic changes matter, and thus competition doesn’t make a difference.

Critique: two different disciplines - paleontologist and biologist. Fossils are thousands of years apart, and a lot of change can happen in that time. Also, many changes, such as how many chambers your heart has or eye color, have no effect on the bones, which will throw off the paleontologist. 

Rebuttal: show me a molecular mechanism for rapid change and long periods of stasis. Gouldists had no response.


DNA is not necessarily divided into triplet codons and strung up exactly, it’s fragmented, with the instructions divided up all over the string. The complete code is an exon, the stuff between is an intron. Splicing enzymes make this model coherent. Vast amounts of genes aren’t coded for in one single stretch, but the pieces are copied and combined by RNA.

David Baltimore - Nobel prize in retrovirus research - birthed the idea of “modular gene construction” - genes can be put together in different ways. A-B-C -> AB || BC || A || B … Tissue-specific expressions of genes. Sometimes, genes aren’t spliced neatly, other genes are taken with it. A-B-C -> AA’B … Now you have one sequence of DNA generating all sorts of proteins in different parts of the body in different phases of life in different tissues in different people… so there’s a lot more to a string of DNA than meets the eye because of what information is taken out in which way.

How much of DNA is actually coded for creating amino acids? The genes for coding proteins are often divided up by long stretches of non-protein-coding DNA. This is where “junk DNA” came from. 95% of DNA is non-coding. But that non-coding DNA has to be doing something. This DNA is the instruction booklet for when to activate/deactivate these genes - an on/off switch. This means Crick was wrong. DNA doesn’t control everything, but is controlled by a host of other stuff - “promoter/repressor sequences” and the like. 

Different genes scattered all over with the same promoters. Transcription factors transcribe a whole bunch of different genes with similar functionality. Flip side - some genes have multiple transcriptors for each of them. This gives rise to networks of genes and transcriptions for gene expression. DNA is simply a readout, with the transcription factors doing their thing, including the environment. This is a way environment affects genetics. 

Hormones are an example of this. By receiving hormonal signals, the cell is doing different stuff with its DNA than normal. Testosterone making muscles bigger is a classic example. Stuff going on in your balls affects all of your muscles. 

It’s therefore not as important how well the proteins do their job, but when they do their job and in which environmental context.

Another lvl of regulation is : chromatin - stabilizes DNA - wrapped around the DNA - if transcription factor comes in, chromatin opens up to allow it in - this needs to be regulated, too, and now it matters whether or not the transcription factors even have an effect. 

Additionally, some things can change the chromatin structure around certain genes that make a permanent change to it, potentially permanently silencing genes. When does this occur? Early development, causing long-term changes. Certain types of mothering changing genes relating to benzo receptors, causing anxiety, for example. This is epigenetics.

Steve Sumie - NIH - monkey brains - change mothering, and you change ~4000 genes. Fertilization is all about genetics, development is all about epigenetics.

What if you get a mutation in a splicing enzyme? Or a promoter/suppressor or transcription factor? There is a whole world where you can get stuff that is not gradual.

























Lecture 5 (Molecular genetics 2):

Mutations in splicing factors result in synthesis of entirely new proteins, driven by the outside influences.

Do these have functions? Not very often. More to come.

Splicing enzymes have their own genes, so there is a whole huge recursive process here.

Big consequences come from promoter mutations - different transcription factors

Promoters have multiple copies down the line - change promoter version, change network. Makes new if->then clause leading to novel effects. This sets up for macroevolutionary change.

GP/gp - “gene and promoter gene”

Vole - promoter upstream of gene of vasopressin - has to do with social affiliative nature of males - has a receptor with its own gene with its own receptors. Many vole species - some mono/polygamists. Difference with monos - different promoter upstream of vasoreceptor gene than the polys. Change the promoter, change mono to poly. Change promoter, change pattern of gene expression without changing genes, but gene promoters

dinorphine - has gene - upstream promo - # copies in rats affect addiction levels.

Vasopressin gp - if human male, which version Vgp affects relationship stability - more likely to get divorced. No diff in gene, but promo.

Next domain for getting macro change: gene for transcription factor - completely different networks. Human vs Chimp genome - 98% same DNA - what are the differences?

Disproportionate share of genetic differences in genes for transcription factors. Change in TF = new networks.

80’s - King, Wilson - Berkeley - came up with 98% number - predicted most interesting evol changes occur in regulatory parts of DNA. Turn ancestor of us and chimps into completely diff-looking things - result of change in regDNA (promoters, supressors, transcription factors, etc.).

From that comes endless networks where small changes are amplified way out of proportion. 

Hunter Fraiser - Stanford - studying how much evchange occurs from regDNA mutations.

Changing genes/proteins might not have much of an effect, but changing if->then clauses definitely gums up the works for a long time.

100 species’ genomes sequenced - sizes ranging widely - more genes = more % of DNA is transcription factors.

If only 1 gene, only 1 TF.
If two genes, 3 TFs: mapping to every combination of those two: A, B, AB
If n genes, 2^(n-1) TFs. 

Dramatic increase in TFs needed for generating networks of gene expression.

Tiny changes in regDNA = big consequences.

Microevolution - involves functions of proteins
Macroevolution - involves which proteins, networks, if->then clauses

Highly revolutionary model about macroev - drawn from Barbara McClintock - extremely successful plant geneticist and NASci member - career destroyed by discovery - worked with corn - different color kernels - bios didn’t know about genes, but did know about trait inheritance.

Sees inheritance pattern - concludes changes caused from mobile genes - transposable genes - transposons - considered crazy by peers, shut herself away with her experiments for decades and wrote papers.

80’s - knowledge of DNA and genes showed she was right. Bios lost their shit.

Gave her the Nobel prize at ~80 yrs old. Continued until she died in 90’s.

She wasn’t that crazy, wasn’t that ostracized, just couldn’t write well - papers incomprehensible.

Field matured - found that McClintock picked right species: plants.

You’re an animal: can run in tough situations. Plants can’t - need protection - stress responses.

Ex: Move genes around in DNA in attempt to protect themselves in challenge. Transposase - enzymes tend to end in -ase: lactase, sucrase, transposase - plant defense. Copies gene, shuffles it somewhere else, and hopes for the best.

Scientists explored this with animals - found transposons in them, too.

Scientists invent novel pathogen, injects into people, makes them sick. Antibodies are developed against it - how so various in making antibodies? Splicing and shuffling of antibody genes, hoping to make bazillions of new networks - basically brute-forcing it and filtering out the nonworking/inferior combinations.

Not the only ones doing that - pathogens do the same. Trapanazome parasite - body generates antibodies - pathogen sheds surface proteins and shuffles DNA for a novel version of it - body has to restart antibody generation

Always a step ahead, meaning immune sys has to evolve better antibody generation methods. Arms race ensues - eventually making transposons.

Occurs outside immune sys, and under special conds

Special transpositional elem - predom in primates - certain cell type/time of life where most mobile: brain cells making new neurons/progenitor cells when they start spreading. 

Increase mvmt of elem at that time - making new neurons - DNA is shuffled to get novel neuronal growth/function. Esp important in early dev - shuffling most active at this stage. The cells making you ‘you’ are the least constrained by genetic determinism - shuffling more active than in any other bodily cell.

Variability from transposable events naturally makes good things and bad - mostly bad. So, finally, are these disasterous? Maybe.

Shuffling is random, so order/usefulness of networks is unlikely, but shuffling helps the process along. It also has big macroev consequences.

Ex: if->then (promoter->gene) clause - you’re dehyd - hematocrit - if dehyd -> then tell kidneys to retain water - not this simple.

Kidneys listen to network signals, not single sets of genes. Suppose some trans event - moves genes - gets put upstream from the genes telling you to ovulate - activates those genes. 

Results in more frequent ovulation depending on threshold - about to die of dehydration, ovulate in last effort to pass genes on? Most used for seasonal mating - wet/dry seasons - ovulates when near water, so gives birth during rainy season.

Ex: crude - have if->then + promoter - tells me that some person smells like me. Turns off transcription of fertility-relating networks - assumes that similar smell = similar genes. Anti-incest is a nature-wide trend.

Transp event - put if-smells-like-me->then network upstream of cooperation gene. Start of kin selection - if more promoters: if-really-smells-like-me->then, and other networks are introduced, giving rise to levels of degree of stimulation, etc. Fine-tunes genetic code. This idea is ridiculous and too simplified, doesn’t relate to the real world, but is a rough approx of the idea.

No one promoter for smells-like-me. instead, that’s a result of an interaction of many networks in response to the outside stimulus.

Transp evs don’t just move around regDNA, but parts of genes via exons. This makes novel genes.

Steroid hormones - glutocorticoids, andro/estrogen, progesterone work like this:
Horm binds to receptor cell, lock-and-key - steroids aren’t made of amino acids, but still has unique shape with uniquely-shaped receptors.

When received, a signal is sent which recognizes specific promoter in DNA - estrogen-responsive promoter. There’s one part of the receptor that recognizes the horm (hormone-binding domain), another that recogs the promoter itself (DNA-binding domain). 

Suppose a transposable evt comes along, and the horm-binding domain gets clipped off and replaced with another HBD - this makes new if->then clause.  

Ex: glucocorticoids - these suppress immune sys - “steroidal anti-inflams.” Non-steroidal has fewer side-effects. 

Bind to glucocortical receptors and bind to glucocortical-responsive promoters. 

Then, pluck out the gluco receptor and replace with progesterone receptor, and you have a novel receptor. Now, instead of suppressing immunity when glucocorticoids are received, suppress progest recepts instead. This suppresses immsys during preggo so your body doesn’t eat your baby. Creates distinction between baby and foreign matter.

Has a catch, though. When pregnant and stop being immsupp. Immsys is tired out, and if becomes too active, leads to auto-imm disease. Bad for people with lupus, they are recommended not to get preg.

Sometimes genes or stretches of genes duplicate - “copy # variant” - copying of stretches of genes leads to complex results, including one gene being a backup if the other is mutated.

# of copies changes how many proteins you can make. Japanese tend to have more copies than Westerners of genes relating to carb digestion. Even copies of genes can make a difference.

More copies means more there to experiment with, and can result in “faster” evolution. One gene is already doing the work, leaving the other to shuffle around.

Joe Thornton - U of Oregon - worked on steroid recepts - showed this occurs in ancestral genes

This explains away Creationist notion of “irred compl” Rapid transition not needed if the shuffling genes fall into the right place to make receptors able to create novel protein structures. The complex systems are made piecewise, with the pieces falling into place when the right shuffling happens.

Russel Fenol (Sanford) - researched eye evol - showed you can have half an eye in many diff forms.

Messing around with one base pair messes up the network attached to it, and changes the proteins made by a bunch of different genes, so point mutations are very significant in the long-term. If it’s an exon that’s mutated, this causes problems with even more genes down the line. 

One single TF change results in a huge change in expression. This is why “good” mutations are statistically unlikely, and also what makes long periods of stasis possible.

However, there is stabilizing selection against negative macroev changes which also produce long periods of stasis.

What if some cataclysm comes along, and only a small range of traits will save you? This is called an “ev bottleneck” - the one good mutation makes up for all the bad ones and gets you through. 

Many examples in the ev record

Cheetahs are so genetically similar that you can trade tissue between any two without rejection. Hominids have gone through a few bottlenecks too.

So how does gradualism and PE fit together?

micv - small changes in protein function
macv - large change in protein shape and networks - novel changes

Human and chimp genome - most changes in the immsys have to do with micv changes. Humans are lots more tuberculosis-resistant than chimps, chimps are more malaria-resistant. This is gradual change.

What about the macv changes? They’re in early dev. Modifying genes related to dev = massive changes in phenotype, as different as human/chimp. Often the src of most interesting changes.

Some fossil pedigrees reek of gradual change, but many others reek of PE. It’s nevertheless difficult to see macv changes in real time because the process is so slow. Some rapid change has been seen, though.

Chicago still has 1880’s rat carcasses lying around. Researchers compared them to modern rats - found tons of genetic changes in just a century.

Darwin’s finches - on Galapagos islands - gene distrib is changing and thus their phenotype.

Diabetic resistance - diabetes has two forms - junior/adult onset db - adult is more freq. If your body is built to store away a lot of nutrients, and your diet is bad, you’ll be more susceptible.

Pacific islanders have been studied, but Peema indians are more interesting.

Peema native Americans - half live in Mexico, half in US, very different diets. US dieters had 90% db rates by 30yrs old.

Mararu, Samoa - massive db rates. 
Yemen Jews - 60s moved to Israel, changed diets - db rates soared, killed off many people. Left fewer genes around. Pacific isl - db rates going down since last decade

Another ex: great genetics story - soviet geneticists in Siberia - started domesticating wild Siberian silver foxes. Selected the calmer, more docile specimens - tame as dogs after 20-30 generations. Only selected for one trait, but phenotypes changed, too.

Another ex: antibiotic resistance. Testament to rapid evol change.

You can have both gradualism and PE happening at the same time. 

Traits don’t evolve individually, they evolve in packages. Individual traits may evolve rapidly with periods of stasis, but all the traits in the pop combine to make one, big, gradualistic line.

Now that this bucket is finished, what’s next? Another world of trying to make sense of the genetics of behavior. 


